I think the analysis we’re going
to do of the two news is interesting
because it will help you understand
better or at least visualize
something we’ve learned
in the previous classes.
Basically, as you know, we are
talking about a mature sector and
in the mature sectors it is usually
given a series of guidelines
or habitual trends such as
the increase in price
warfare, such as
concentration, scale economies,
etc.
We will look at the food industry
in Spain.
We start with the first news,
the battle for supermarket control.
We will go back to the news and highlight
topics from which we will draw
conclusions.
Well, as we see, he makes a
comparative between the concentration
in the market of Portugal or the
UK in which he speaks of being much
more concentrated, with 80 % of
the market share in the hands
of the large groups.
In Spain, however, it seems that the
large chains are distributed by 42%.
Thus, the growth potential
of large chains, the
trend will be towards greater
concentration.
And here it gives us one of the keys
and it is the price war.
The price war accelerates concentration
by a number of factors
that we will see later.
Look what he says to us.
Big players like Mercadona,
Diaolide, have sources
of expansion plans.
Within its strategic plan is to continue
to grow in Spain because there
is still a margin of
growth for these large groups
that only have a 40%.
Fijaros is a very mature sector where
it is difficult to take customers
away from your competitors.
But it turns out that these large
groups have a very aggressive
expansion strategy.
And let’s see how.
Here is the growth strategy
of the day.
We want to be the main
players in the consolidation of
a still very fragmented market.
As you can see, there is still
potential for growth.
And how do they do it?
How does it do in this case?
It explains us.
Compro has acquired Slacker
drug chain for more than $70 million.
He also acquired the El Árbol
chain with 450 supermarkets and
made another acquisition of 146
supermarkets to Eroski.
The growth strategy
is clear.
What you are doing is buying your
competitors.
This, as we say, implies or
impacts the concentration
of the market.
If the adults are eating the
kids, the concentration
is increasing.
And in the course of growth strategies
that we will see later
you will learn, you will understand
very well what are the differences
between growing internally, which
in this case would be to open
more supermarkets or buy
from your competitors.
It is an inorganic
growth strategy.
Here he tells us.
Buying from the competition, even if
it’s expensive, is the fastest way
to win customers.
Obviously, it’s easier to grow
quickly if you buy from your
competitors than if you grow
internally.
And it seems that
supermarkets, the big groups,
have two models to grow.
As I said, there are two models.
The one of Dia, which we have already
seen, buys its competitors
or also grows through franchises.
Mercadona and Lidl are
growing organically.
Growing organically means growing
internally, that is, opening
new stores.
Mercadona is planning to open 60 stores
in 2015.
It is an old news, but it does
not serve.
And the last thing I want us to see
and analyze in this news is how
competition works in such an environment.
We will see.
Competition in a mature
market is usually fierce
and we add that there has
been a crisis in recent
years in Spain.
So what is happening
in such a context?
And here we have it very clear.
In such a context, large companies,
large chains have an advantage,
have a competitive advantage.
This is what we call economies of scale.
We will look at this concept
in more detail later.
What is the impact of
the economy in a sector
like food?
Well, so very clearly.
That by having a higher purchase
volume you can negotiate better
with suppliers.
We go back to concentration.
If we are in a market with a
certain concentration, where the
big ones have an enormous advantage
over the small ones because they
benefit from better costs, what
happens is that the concentration
will increase.
The little ones will die or many
of the little ones will die
because you can’t compete being
small in such a market.
Although here it gives us a guide
and says, however, some small
operators have found a formula
to defend themselves.
And how do they do it?
How can the big ones defend themselves?
through purchasing centers.
They come together to buy.
They try to counter that economy
of scale or that competitive advantage
that the big ones have by uniting.
Let us make a quick summary of
what we have seen in this news.
As we see, the food sector
is in maturity and a huge price
war has been produced by a number
of factors, among other things,
because there has been a
crisis for a few years, but
in itself competition generates
price war.
What is happening in this context?
Well, because it takes to be competitive,
it takes to be very large,
that’s what we call economies
of scale.
Big people benefit from better
buying conditions and in
a sector like food
is vital.
And what happens?
Well, because the big ones in
the end what they are doing is
either buying or growing internally,
creating new supermarkets
or new points of sale and
the sector is concentrating.
There are fewer and fewer,
the small are smaller and
the big are bigger.
The big fish eats the boy, right?
What options do the kids have?
They gave us some clues.
What they can do, among other things,
is to allied with each other
through purchasing centrals.
Well, it’s an example in this
sector, but what I want you to be
clear is that in an environment
of this type, where there are economies
of scale, where it’s necessary
to have economies of scale,
being small is complicated.
But in mature markets we can
say that there is no space,
there is no possibility of competing
being small.
Well, because it is not so, it is not
so, there are other options, as we will
see.
But usually what happens in mature
markets is that markets are concentrated
and in the end what remains
are very large competitors and
niche competitors, very differentiated
competitors.
What do we mean with this?
This is also something we
will see later in the competitive
niche strategy.
Well, if you compete with a very
different proposal, either because
it is very local or because it is
very specialized in luxury,
etc., you can go to that niche,
to that small part of the market,
and in that niche be protected,
not be so threatened by the
large groups.
In the supermarket,
I will give you an example.
There are supermarkets that
are, say, prime supermarkets, luxury
supermarkets, gourmet
supermarkets, like Sánchez
and Romero.
You will have your clientele.
It is a niche, it is a small part of
the population, but they have their clientele.
They are not competing with the
big groups, because they offer something
different.
Or in the food sector, for example,
we can have the small, convenience
stores, fisheries,
carcasses, etc., with a
much more personalized
service, of much higher
quality.
Of course, this is another niche.
Or, for example, if you have a
proposal that has some very differential
value, a 711 store, a 24 hour
open store, well, then, let’
s say that you are coming
out of that red ocean, because
you have customers who value
this case, well, then,
the convenience, proximity
and time span.
It is a way to be present in this
market, in a niche.